You know, occasionally I have someone who is newer to DCC ask me the question.
They'll say, well, how long have you been here?
And I don't mind the question.
It's the answer that oftentimes leaves me a little conflicted.
Because I know what the intent of the question is.
And I know what the expectations are.
they want to know how long I've been a pastor at DCC.
The answer to that is I'm about halfway through my 11th year.
So that's the really short, really easy answer.
I know that's the one they're asking me about.
And I know that the assumption behind that question is that they would look at a guy my age and they would figure that I've probably been in ministry, I know full time been a pastor for 30 or 40 years.
I probably was hired here from some other church position
And I also know that those assumptions pretty much fail to really answer the question of how long have I been here.
If I try to answer it in a way that I think does justice to the question, it is a paragraph at the very least.
I mean, for starters, a lot of you know this, right?
My thing moved here and I was starting fifth grade.
So from fifth grade on, I lived in Squim.
I graduated from Squim High School.
And then I went on to a Bible school and summers I'd be back here in Squim and I was in turns a junior high youth pastor and did a bunch of different stuff.
And then after graduation, we came back here, Burnett and I got married.
It was during high school, I really had felt God's call to ministry.
And after we've been here, I felt God was leading us to go to seminary.
We moved to Los Angeles to the seminary.
So far, so good.
This is about what you would expect a guy who felt called a ministry to do.
You get your education, you go to seminary.
And then I was hired as an associate pastor at a really wonderful church down in Central California up in the Sierras.
Again, that's about what you'd expect.
during seminaries as a youth pastor, so that's what happens, right?
You get your education, you probably spend time as a youth pastor, you may spend time as an associate pastor, and then of course you would become maybe a senior pastor at some point if that's where God's leading you.
That wasn't exactly how my story went.
Through no fault of the churches there, God let me enter into what the 14th century Spanish friar John of the Cross called a dark night of the soul.
And as many of you know, I plunged into this years long period of severe doubt.
My faith was stripped down to the core and probably beyond the core.
In fact, I say that I became a functional agnostic, which means that I never formally identified myself as an agnostic, but functionally, in my inner world, I doubted everything I'd ever believed.
resulted in me deciding to resign my position.
Hardest thing I've ever done.
But I figured I needed to somehow detach my paycheck from this struggle I was going through inside.
I couldn't come to my conclusions simply because I needed the money.
And so I resigned and we moved back here to squim and I started a business.
We started attending DCC.
I was kind of a basket case back in those days.
I sat right over in there, I think at the third row back, just sat there for a long time, trying to figure out what did I believe.
And God and His grace began rebuilding me.
I built a business during those years.
But throughout all of that, I was listening, I was thinking, I was praying as best I could, which was kind of pitiful back in those days.
Lots and lots of reading.
And through a series of events, some of which I can only attribute to God's gracious, miraculous intervention, my faith was rebuilt.
And I began to step back into ministry, not any kind of a paid sense.
I was just serving here in the church and I helped in various ministries and I got involved in leadership here and I figured that was probably gonna be the way my story ended.
I left ministry, my faith was rebuilt, and now I'm running a business, and that's how life goes.
It wasn't a bad story.
I was actually pretty content with where God had brought me.
It just wasn't the story I originally envisioned.
Then Pastor Scott decided to retire.
And people started asking if I was going to submit an application for the position.
And my initial response was, are you crazy?
Last time I rode that horse, I had hit the ground pretty hard.
And besides, I'm thinking what kind of a resume do I have to offer, really?
Failed associate pastor with history of doubt in 20 years in medical equipment.
Not the most promising credentials, might I say.
But my first response was not my final response.
And after a lot of prayer and counsel and my wife's support, I finally submitted my rather pathetic resume.
With the demand that the elders do a full search, I said, don't just hire me because I'm sitting here.
And that was 11 and a half years ago.
I still have a few questions about how thorough the search was that they did.
But for Burnett and I, serving here has been such a blessing.
But it's also the reason why it is really hard for me to answer that little question, how long have you been here?
Because there's a lot in that.
Now you may be wondering why I would go on this rather lengthy biographical detour when we're in the middle of studying Paul's letter to the Ephesians.
Well it's because I think the Paul had the same sort of quandary except far more so whenever the subject of his own ministry came up.
Today we're gonna take a look at Ephesians chapter three and it begins with an example of what I'm talking about.
Let's take a look at Ephesians chapter three verse one
Paul says, for this reason, I, Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, on behalf of you Gentiles.
He begins with this transition statement.
He says, for this reason.
And so you immediately have to say, well, for what reason?
What is going to lead him into what he's about to talk about?
And the reason he is giving, he's referring back to another one of his long sentences.
Ephesians has several of these really long sentences.
We looked at the longest sentence, which comes in chapter one.
Chapter two has another long sentence.
It goes from chapter two verse 11 down through 22.
And we looked at that last week.
And in that section, Paul talks about God's nearness.
He talks about the peace that we now have.
with God as people who are in Christ.
That's a big theme of this letter.
And the fact that both Jews and Gentiles are now unified as one in him.
In fact, they form a new spiritual temple, he says, a place where God's spirit is pleased to dwell.
Not a temple of brick and mortar, but a temple comprised of people.
In fact, people who throughout all their lives had been kind of natural enemies, very separate.
He says, now you've been brought together.
And he says, because of what God has done in our lives, we have the right to approach God with confidence in prayer.
And altogether, that provides a reason for a beautiful prayer that Paul prays for them.
We're gonna get to that, but first, Paul mentions a bit of his own context at the time of this writing.
And he really doesn't know a simple way to say it.
He starts by saying that he was a prisoner.
The cause of his imprisonment was tied directly to his preaching about Jesus along with some political maneuvering by some very angry Jewish leaders who were intent on shedding up someone who they saw as a heretical rabbi.
Paul at one time had been one of them, highly respected among them, but now they saw him as a traitor because he had become a follower of Jesus.
In fact, he was a double trader because not only was he now a follower of Jesus, he was openly embracing Gentiles, which went against everything that Paul in his former life had ever espoused.
In fact, a lot of Gentiles saw him as a heretic that needed me shut up.
Don't forget about that riot that occurred right here in Ephesus where he's writing the letter.
by the silversmiths because Paul's teaching was causing many of the Greeks to turn away from the worship of Artemis and they had a major business in making little silver idols for Artemis.
He caused a riot right in that city.
But note who he says is his warden in his imprisonment.
It would have been quite accurate to say Paul a prisoner of Rome.
But that's not how Paul saw things.
He says Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus.
Paul was convinced that his path, even though maybe it wasn't the path that he would have planned or desired for himself, he was convinced that it was not simply the result of fate or negative political maneuverings, but that God was still in control, and that he was safely in God's hands.
So it's not Paul, a prisoner of Rome, it's Paul,
a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
It also struck me as an amazing statement for Paul to say that he was in Roman chains because of Jesus and Gentiles.
Again, you think about this man who'd been raised as a strictly Orthodox Jew, and as such, most of his life had shunned contact with Gentiles.
He had been trained by the most elite of rabbis.
He was a student of Gamaliel as a strict Pharisee,
He had at one time vehemently shunned Jesus, and at one time he'd been a violent hunter of the very movement that he now found himself a leader in.
Back in the day, Paul would have gladly put Paul in prison.
But God, in this act of grace-filled divine intervention, God had literally stopped
the Jesus-heating Paul in his tracks.
Reversed his course and in the process had entrusted him as a messenger of this revolutionary message, not only for his fellow Jews, but more shockingly, Paul was given a specific calling to go to the Gentiles.
And so, like one of my long-winded answers when someone asks, how long have you been here?
Paul just can't stop by telling a little bit of the story.
Some of these folks in Ephesus knew his story.
He had spent two or three years there among them.
So like many of you, many of you know my story.
Many of you have been here since I first showed up and sat over there in that pew.
You know my story, but there's a lot of others of you that don't.
And the same is true for Paul in this situation.
There were many of the people in that church who had been there when Paul had been there, but the church had grown a lot too.
And Paul knows that not all these people know really who he is or what God has done.
And so from verse two down through verse 13 of this chapter, Paul goes on a biographical bunny trail, if you will.
If we can see behind the curtain and observe how this letter is being composed,
Here's what I think we would see, and I think it helps explain how Paul sometimes wanders off onto these Simming Bunny trails, you know?
No doubt led by the Holy Spirit, I believe that, but when you understand what's going on here, you can see how we kind of get this stream of consciousness going on sometimes in Paul's writings.
I think Paul is just dictating this letter.
Seated next to him as he's talking is his Emanuensis.
That's a fancy term for a guy that's writing down what you're saying.
We know that Paul used his secretary when he composed the letter to the Romans, all right?
In fact, in the closing paragraphs of Romans, we find this.
I, Tirtius, who wrote this letter, greet you in the Lord.
So the whole book of Romans goes along and suddenly in the closing lines, the secretary, the eminuensis, exposes himself and says, oh just by the way, hi, I'm Tirtius and I think I've actually been doing the writing here.
Paul's been speaking the words, I've just been writing them down.
There are other letters where Paul makes special note when he says that he is pending the closing greeting with his own hand.
The implication seems to be I've been using a secretary to write this down, but here as I'm closing off, I'm adding my own signature to it.
And so considering that likely scenario, I think it's easy to see how Paul could branch off on some of his bunny trails, because as he is talking, as he's dictating, and as his mind is caught up in what is going on, he begins to think about
his amazing personal story that has brought him to this point.
So we might think of this as an inspired stream of consciousness.
So let's follow Paul's bunny trail and then just see where it leads.
This is Ephesians chapter three, verses one through 13.
For this reason I, Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles, assuming that you've heard of the stewardship of God's grace that was given to me for you,
how the mystery is made known to me by revelation as I have written briefly."
He's probably talking about his experience on the Damascus Road.
When you read this, you can perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ, which was not made known to the sons of men in other generations as it has now been revealed to us holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit.
This mystery
is that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.
Of this gospel, I was made a minister according to the gift of God's grace, which was given me by the working of His power.
To me, though I am the very least of all the saints, this grace was given to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to bring to light for everyone what is the plan of the mystery
hidden for ages in God, who created all things.
So that through the church, the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly places.
This was according to the eternal purpose that he has realized in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and access with confidence through our faith in him.
So I ask you not to lose heart
over what I am suffering for you, which is for your glory.
Let me just draw our attention to a few things that we run across on this bunny trail.
Paul is already stated, and he's very clear that this revelation that in Christ Jesus, Jews and Gentiles together share in the promise and the blessing of Jesus, this long-awaited Messiah, is something that had not been understood
by those who had come before Paul.
Now note, he doesn't say that this is a new revelation to him alone.
He says it has been revealed to multiple people, his holy apostles.
And I think here he's speaking specifically of those disciples who had walked with Jesus.
They had that personal experience.
And then he talks about prophets, some who had made spirit-led declarations, revelations from God that had affirmed what the apostles said.
He goes,
a group of people who have testified to this.
You might think of Peter, one of Jesus' close disciples who was led by the spirit to go to the home of a Roman centurion named Cornelius and to preach the gospel there.
And of course, the amazement that Peter experienced seeing the Holy Spirit come on these Gentiles the same way they'd seen on the day of Pentecost among the Jews.
And of course there were these prophets who also under supernatural revelation had proclaimed the same.
Again, you think that they have Pentecost and they heard people speaking in different languages and saw this miraculous outpouring of God's spirit that testified to the fact that God was doing something new, something incredible.
Now, Paul is equally clear that the fact he has been entrusted as one of God's messengers is purely by God's grace
and it is no credit to himself.
In fact, he describes himself as the least of all the saints.
In fact, the very least of all the saints.
See, Paul knew his personal history.
He knew his story and he knew that in terms of being a qualified preacher of the gospel, it didn't look very good.
Can you imagine the shame he must have felt
When he went to minister in a church and he encountered Christians there that he had at one time put in prison and had beaten.
Maybe even had beaten himself.
Years ago there was, I think it was maybe the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II.
I think that's when it was.
And we were still in California at the time.
And we were doing kind of a little recognition on a Sunday night.
Had several World War II veterans in the church that were sharing a bit of their story.
And one of the guys in our church, his name was Helmut.
He was an American citizen.
But during World War II, he had been a German.
And he'd been drafted into Hitler's army.
He was a sergeant.
And a pretty amazing story.
And so I asked if he would share something as well.
And he said he would be glad to do that.
Helmut was an avid American.
I mean, every 4th of July, he said to him, talk about how much he loved America.
But he had come through this whole experience of being in World War II on the other side.
And one of the other guys who was going to share that night had been a navigator on American bombers in World War II.
And he and I were talking about it, and I mentioned that Helmut was going to share some.
And also my friend got a real serious look and he said, do you know if any of his family were in Berlin during the war?
Because of course you understand.
My friend had been the navigator on one of the bombers that had bombed Berlin.
And thousands, thousands of civilians were killed in those bombing raids and suddenly my friend is going, what if I played a role in the death of some of Helmut's family?
I think in a sense, Paul had to have some of those same experiences.
He went into churches and he met people.
And some of these people looked at him and was like, you're the guy that had me thrown in prison.
You're the guy that had my uncle beaten.
In fact, maybe you're the guy that played a role in seeing to it that some of my family were put to death.
Paul knew his story.
And so he could say, I am the least.
of these saints.
And yet it was despite that grim reality that Paul still describes himself as a saint.
Maybe the least of saints, but a saint no less.
And why?
Because of Jesus.
And I think that helps explain why Paul sometimes makes up words.
You remember Mary Poppins, the words she made up?
Supercalifragilistic expialidocious.
Uh-oh.
What happened to my sound?
We have to do that over again.
Do we have sound?
All right.
You know, you can say it backwards, which is douches, alley, xpistic, fragile, cally, rufus, but that's going a bit too far, don't you think?
Yeah.
Sometimes you just need a bigger word than you can find in the dictionary.
Now, in this
Short biography from Paul, there are three made-up words, at least in the Greek, they're made-up words.
For instance, right there in verse seven, Paul takes some linguistic liberties when he uses that word, the very least of saints.
My, it is one word in the Greek, even though we get five words out of it.
He takes this Greek word for least, and then he amplifies it into a very unusual form.
In fact, my old Greek professor, Clint Arnold, describes it as a comparative form of a superlative adjective, which is logically impossible.
Just in case you have no idea what the comparative form of a superlative adjective is, you've got to admit it's still a pretty cool phrase to throw around dinner parties, right?
Dr. Arnold suggests that the way in English we might translate it would be as leaster.
I am the leaster.
of all the saints.
Just prior to this inventive word, back in verse six, Paul has another.
He begins by saying that the Gentiles are fellow heirs with the Jews of this inheritance in Jesus.
And in Greek, the word that he uses for heir has a little prefix at the start of it.
It's the prefix soon, which means with.
Now, the ESV and most translations break it into two words in English,
That's what makes the most sense in English as fellow heirs.
But in Greek, it's just one word.
So you might throw a hyphen in and say, we are together heirs.
That's what he's trying to say.
We are together.
Understand, these two groups who'd always been apart, you know, not just separate words, but separate cultures, he says, oh no, now, we're just like one word.
We are together heirs.
He says, you know, you natural rivals.
If you're in Christ,
When the will is read, you're gonna find that you both have full and legal ownership of all it contains.
And then to enforce that idea of unity and sameness, he says that they are members of the same body.
So to drive his point home, he adds that prefix that described being together heirs soon to this word for the body.
in our English translation that comes out as all those words, members of the same body, but when Paul wrote in Greek, it was just one word.
So maybe we could say that we are a together body.
We are together errors.
We are a together body.
We are one in Jesus.
Now, what he ends up doing in the process is he creates a whole new word.
Greek scholars have
found this word nowhere else in written Greek.
This is Paul's own little creation.
And people who had forever held each other at arm's length, Paul is willing to coin new words to emphasize that they are now arms on the same body.
You are together.
Just file that one away because in the second half of Paul's letter, we're gonna come back to this idea of our union in Christ and what it looks like to live that out in every sphere
of our experience.
They had a specific sphere between Jew and Gentile.
And I'll talk about this more in weeks ahead.
That's really not, that's not a pressing thing for us.
I bet that none of you in the last couple of weeks have gone through any tension over whether or not people you were talking to were Jews or Gentiles.
I'm just pretty sure that's not an issue.
I maintain there are plenty of other places where it is an issue, and we'll get into that.
Paul has one more supercalifragilistic word for us, but for that we have to move along to this beautiful prayer that I just love that we find in Ephesians chapter three.
Ephesians chapter three verses 14 through 19 begins like this.
For this reason I bow my knees before the Father from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named.
For what reason?
Well, remember I talked about the bunny trail?
What Paul is doing, now he's getting back to where he actually started, before he went on this detour about kind of his calling and all.
For this reason, and we're back to that sentence from Ephesians 2, 11 through 22.
Because of God's nearness, because of the peace we now have with God as people who are in Christ, the fact that Jews and Gentiles are now united in him, and because we have the right to approach God with confidence and prayer,
For this reason, in light of that, Paul gets on his knees and he prays three things.
Request number one, that according to the riches of his glory, he may grant you to be strengthened with power through his spirit in your inner being so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith.
Paul sees deep heart faith as a gift
of God's Spirit.
It's one thing to say that I believe in a surfacing sort of way.
When you read Gallup polls and they will tell you the percentage of people who identify as Christians, they usually have to start qualifying.
What do they mean by that?
Because a lot of people say, oh yeah, I'm a Christian.
I believe
What does that mean?
Does that mean that it's kind of like a political label that you carry?
Does it mean that you go to church twice a year, Christmas and Easter, whether you need to or not?
What does that really mean?
But Paul says this, the true deep heart faith that truly follows Jesus and loves him.
He goes, this is a gift of God's spirit.
And Paul's prayer is that these people who he loves would be blessed by God with that kind of deep
soul trust, and heart knowledge, that according to the riches of his glory, he would grant you to be strengthened with power through his spirit in your inner being so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith.
And that leads to request number two, that you, being rooted and grounded in love, may have strength to comprehend with all the saints
What is the breadth and length and height and depth and to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge?
Here's part of what Paul prays will grow out of that spirit-enabled faith.
He prays that they will be able to comprehend the incomprehensible.
That's the prayer, isn't it?
And this is where Paul then coins his third supercalifragilistic word.
When he speaks of the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, he uses a word that scholars have found nowhere outside of the Bible.
This love that surpasses knowledge.
At its root, this word refers to a footprint.
As a verb, that idea of a footprint was used for tracking something, like following a trail.
But Paul kind of adds to the word and he pretzels it around to mean something more like
you can't track it down.
This goes beyond your ability to follow.
You are following the trail and suddenly the trail splits into two trails and suddenly those trails begin to cross over each other and pretty soon you can't tell anymore all the details of all the trails but you definitely know you're on to something big.
If you're tracking a bear and all of a sudden there's a lot of bear tracks
You know you're following something, but it's bigger than you know what to do with.
And Paul says, that is the love of Christ.
I want you to know this unknowable thing, this too hard to follow, too big to take in thing you praise, but it'll lose themselves in is the love of Christ.
Right up front, Paul is saying that to truly understand the scope and the magnitude of Christ's love is impossible.
But he's praying that God will give them the thirst to attempt to drink the ocean.
That's his prayer.
Could I just ask, what is your concept of Christ's love?
Is it that big?
Is it that deep?
I mean, have you really thought about how unfathomable Christ's love is?
Have you begun to understand it well enough that you find yourself without enough words to describe the greatness of God's love?
And then there's request number three, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
How's that for a prayer?
He prays that finite creatures will be filled with all the fullness of the infinite God.
In other words, he's praying that we'll be filled with God's love and that it will ooze out of every pore.
You will take in more than you can take in so that it will leak out.
Paul prays the knowledge of God's love empowered by the faith that God provides
will lead to lives bursting with God's size love.
So if you put it all together, Paul's prayer is that they will be able to comprehend the incomprehensible, they will know the unknowable, they'll be filled with the infinite, and no wonder he bows his knees and prays that God by the riches of his glory would grant them the strength
through his spirit in their inner being for that task.
Let me wrap this up with a very personal question.
What kind of saint are you?
Unfortunately, in some traditions, the idea of being a saint has been elevated to a unique status that is attained only by the most holy.
But you know, in the Bible, the Saint Club is not nearly that exclusive.
In fact, Paul used it freely and repeatedly to refer to every person who had placed faith in Jesus.
Paul certainly knew that on the personal achievement score with his violent history, he was certainly not a saint based on good behavior.
And that's why he humbly referred to himself as
the Easter of saints.
So how about you?
When you think about your history, maybe the history of your distant past, some of you maybe still carry guilt and regret for things of your distant past.
Some of you still feel perhaps kind of unworthy
You feel like kind of a poser to be in a church on a Sunday morning.
It's like if people actually knew who I am, what I've done, what my history looks like, they probably wouldn't want to sit next to me.
Maybe it's just your history of the last week.
Maybe it's the history of the argument you had with your spouse on the way to church this morning.
You're sitting here going, I don't really think I'm much of a
Saint.
Maybe you would argue with Paul that you in fact are leester than him.
Maybe you'd go one step further.
Maybe you're here, but you've never surrendered your life to Jesus.
I mean, you come to church, if someone said to you, are you a Christian, you'd say, well, yeah, I'm an American, I mean, aren't we all?
But you personally,
have never asked Jesus to become the Lord and leader of your life.
Maybe you figure he's got enough problems to deal with already without your sorry basket of fails.
That you wouldn't really want someone like you in the club.
That sainthood is not in your future.
Paul felt free to call weak people like us saints not because of our attainments but because
of who we become in Jesus, what He has done for us.
And the reason people like us have been invited to step into life in Him is because of His mind blowing, boundary shattering, logic trail confounding love for us.
Not because of what we've done, but because He loves us despite that.
That doesn't mean that Jesus is just a mushy, codependent sap who can't bring himself to acknowledge your failures.
You know, fingers in his ears, eyes closed.
I can't hear that.
That's not the thing.
The message of Christ dying on the cross means that he fully knows and he reckoned with the depth of your sin and yet despite knowing our sin and our selfishness, not despite because he understood the depth of it,
Christ chose to step in our place and take punishment that we rightfully deserved.
The cross also means that in Christ we're offered an identity that is not rooted in our past but is gloriously tied to His future.
If your past is still defining who you are, you don't understand who you are in Christ.
Your past happened for sure.
Nobody's denying that.
The fact that you've been forgiven, that you have been made a saint in Jesus is to his praise.
And so can you freely talk about your past as what happened back then?
Yes, you can because it's not who defines you now.
If Paul was not ashamed to identify himself as a saint, you shouldn't be either because it's what Jesus has done for us.
The step that qualifies us for sainthood is not some miracle you performed or some amazing list of good deeds that gets reviewed by a church council and they decide to confer a title on you.
What qualifies you for sainthood is a simple step of faith.
It is the admission that I am the Easterliness.
How's that for supercalifragilistic word?
And a request.
for Jesus to become the leader of your life.
Request for his spirit to come and do in you what only he can do.
You want some homework for this afternoon?
Spend some time in prayer asking God's spirit to enable you to grasp in fresh ways how great is the love with which you have been loved.
And then ask him to help you know how that love should be poured out through you to others.
Maybe you think that's a simple assignment.
Because ever since you were in Sunday school, you've had it figured out that Jesus loves me this I know because the Bible tells me so.
And if that's you, if that seems like pretty simple assignment, let me give you some extra credit work.
I was reflecting on this recently and I was struck by the inner adjectives that I often use when I'm confessing my own failures.
I know I blow it, but it's the way that I describe those indiscretions to the Lord and to myself.
They are bad, to be sure.
But I define them as moments of confusion or weakness or I was provoked.
I was struggling.
I was afraid.
I'm the product of some dysfunctions in my background.
I was unaware.
I was blind.
In other words, most of my heirs, as I would prefer to see them, are primarily things to be pitied.
And I'm really sorry, Jesus.
Thank you for being nice to poor, poor, pitiful me.
And I recognize that I often give myself way too much benefit of the doubt.
And in doing that, I minimize the astounding love that would cause God to see me as beautiful in Christ.
Now my sense of justice I've discovered gets a lot clearer when I think about the indiscretions of those that I don't like as much.
They're selfish.
They're proud.
They can be hateful.
They're vengeful.
They can be deceitful.
They're betrayers, narcissists, and the list goes on.
In other words, and it's probably just me, probably none of you.
But I'm grateful for the grace that would save a pitiful creature like me, that Jesus would take the lash to spare a poor soul like mine.
Jesus loves me this I know.
But I find it more startling that he would take the lash for my enemy.
That he would spare such a twisted soul from the justice they so richly deserve.
So the extra credit assignment is that you'd spend some time asking God to help you see yourself and his love in such a way that you see those who anger and hurt you through his eyes.
See, I think if we really grasp hold of God's love, if we understand the depth, if we become to know the unknowable, if we are filled with the infinite, then it has to not only affect the way we see ourselves and live from some of us a burden of shame we've carried that we should not because we're forgiven, it has to affect how we look at other people.
And the people that we find ourselves recoiling from and disliking and speaking of in the harshest terms
Somewhere the Holy Spirit needs to get hold of us and say, wait a minute, these are people that Jesus died for and that God loves just as infinitely as he loves you.
May the Holy Spirit show us the Easter saints our ongoing need of grace and reveal to us more deeply God's great love and may he keep reshaping our hearts.
to be like his.